---
layout: post
title: Keys, please?
---

h3. Arrival

Twas the day before the "Tough Mudder":http://toughmudder.com/events/northern-california/bear-valley-course-map/ and the rumor was snow.  "Bear Valley":http://www.bearvalley.com/ is a beautiful ski resort located somewhere between Lake Tahoe and Yosemite.  I had signed up to run the 7ish mile mountain course littered with a dozen or so obstacles for what seemed like one hell of a good time. "Our gym":http://tjsgym.com/ signed up a dozen or so fellow Crossfitters and we were eager to tackle the course, and enjoy some time in the mountains.

Driving into the idyllic town of Fairfax, California, the weekend was starting off perfectly.  It was warm, I had an easy 100#s of clothes shoved into a backpack and felt prepared for anything.  I picked up my road trip partner, Heidi, and we headed off to Whole Foods for some road-trip grub.  The 4-hour drive from San Rafael to the team cabin in "Dorrington, CA":http://bit.ly/9E93pL went by in no time.

We arrived at the cabin in perfect time for dinner, but we had one glitch... no cabin keys.  Andy, our team captain, had secured a beautiful cabin only 20 minutes from the mountain, but it seemed we were the first to arrive.  It's funny the things you'll do when you feel justified.  I scoured the surroundings of the house, checked high and low, but no keys could be found.  No worries.  Heidi and I had filled a cooler full of food on our way up, so we enjoyed some in-car dining in the driveway.  It's worth mentioning that Heidi is vegan, and in-car dining posed much less of an issue for her, than it did for me.  Try as I might, the heat from my Volvo's headlights were no match for my steak.  Lettuce dipped in hummus is mighty tasty, though.

After watching a lone wolf dart between pine trees and waving off a hungry neighborhood dog, we decided to explore the open road a bit more and leave our driveway post.  We left a note on the garage door and hit the windy open road of CA Route 4.  

h3. Race Day

h3. Oh shit

h3. Making plans

h3. Define "exact"

h3. Pull it

h3. Make it happen

h3. Square one